# Data science is going to change the way we teach statistics

This is a talk for the University of Birmingham Psychology seminar series that
I gave on April 11, 2018.

## Abstract

We have been teaching statistics in more or less the same way since Ronald
Fisher invented the analysis of variance in the 1920s. Many of us would agree
that this teaching has not been a great success. Standard statistical methods
such as t-tests and ANOVA rely on a fairly substantial body of mathematics that
we cannot hope to cover. Until recently, we had little choice but to resort to
take-my-word-for-it general descriptions of what the common tests are doing,
followed by recipes as to when the tests can be applied and the situations in
which they can be misleading.   As a result, it is not at all surprising that
many students find statistics uncomfortable and unsatisfying, and it is
difficult for them to reason about their analysis when they start to work with
their own data.

Partly in response to this problem, statistics education is undergoing
a revolution, under the banner of "data science".  Data science is a term often
used for a body of practice in data analysis, that emphasizes the role of
computing and algorithms in exploring data and testing models.  Practitioners
of data science have benefited from recent advances in programming languages
and tools, that make it much easier for students to use code for data analysis.
As a result, they have rediscovered the conclusions of pioneers in data
analysis such as John Tukey and Leo Breiman.  As part of this revolution, it
has become clear that it is easier to explain statistical methods using simple
algorithms such as simulation and randomization.  Explaining statistics in this
way gives the students a deeper and simpler way of understanding statistical
inference; it also gives them the tools they need to adapt their analysis to
the data, rather than the data to the analysis. I will show some of these tools
and teaching methods, and argue, as do many educators in statistics, that we
should adopt these tools and methods in our own teaching.

Slides at <https://github.com/matthew-brett/psy-data-sci/psy_data_sci_slides.pdf>.

The talk also used some [Jupyter](https://jupyter.org) Notebooks, that you will
see in this repository.
